[Go to table of contents](index.md)

# Scenario

In this assignment, you will learn the basics of unit testing JavaScript (or TypeScript) code. You will learn the
concepts of Jest and learn how to use them to write basic tests, that do not use Angular yet. If you already have
experience with Jest, you can immediately move on to the next assignment, that will introduce specific Angular testing
concepts.

The basis for this assignment will be a simple ShoppingCartService. The ShoppingCartService keeps track of the
customer's selection of books, and calculates the amount he or she has to pay.

## Techniques

* [Jest](https://jestjs.io/)

#### Jest

The ShoppingCartService is defined in the folder `src/app/shopping-cart`. A separate file defines the test
specification.

> **Best practice: naming conventions**
> As the [Angular Style Guide](https://angular.io/guide/styleguide) advises, the specification has the name
> `shopping-cart.service.spec.ts` and is located in the same folder.

1. Open the test specification: src/app/shopping-cart/shopping-cart.service.spec.ts It already contains a test suite
   with some empty tests in it.

   > The `describe` command groups a set of tests together and takes two arguments: a description of what you are
   > testing, and a function containing the actual test cases. Each separate test case is defined by an `it` command.
   >
   > The `it` command in its turn takes again two arguments: a description of the desired behaviour and a function
   > implementing the actual test.
   >
   > You can define as many `it`s as you need to describe the behaviour, and you can even nest `describe`s to organise
   > your tests. Both `it` and `describe` are functions defined by Jest.

2. Run the tests. You can do this in two ways:
  1. Jest tests can simply be run from the command line. Simply type "ng test".
  2. Jest has good integration with IDEs, for example WebStorm or
     [VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=firsttris.vscode-jest-runner).

   Check the test results. How does the description strings in `describe` and `it` come back in the test output?

3. In the test, introduce a constant containing an instance of the class to test. The ShoppingCartService constructor
   takes an HttpClient as a parameter. For now, you can just pass an empty object like this: `{} as HttpClient`. Define
   the constant just below the line with the `describe`, but just above the line with the `it`. What difference does it
   make on what line you'll define the constant?

4. Start with the simplest test case. If the shopping cart is empty, `totalAmount()` should return 0. In the test
   specification, just call the `totalAmount()` function and use Jest's `expect` and `toBe` functions to check that it
   returns 0: `expect(actualResult).toBe(expectedResult)`.

   > Assertions in Jest are written using the `expect` keyword and a matcher. `toBe` is a matcher that checks if two
   > objects are the same object (using ===), and can be used for primitive types. `toEqual` is a matcher that checks if
   > two objects are equivalent, and can be used to check if two different objects have the same property values.
   >
   > Jest comes with a large number of [predefined matchers](https://jestjs.io/docs/expect), and it is also easy to
   > [write your own](https://jestjs.io/docs/expect#custom-matchers-api).

5. Re-run the tests and check the results. Why did the test fail? Can you fix it?

   > **Best practice: see your test fail**
   > To make sure that your test actually does what it should, you should always make sure that you see your test fail
   > first. You could do this by filling in an expected result other than what you really expect. Or even better, you
   > can test drive your code like in this example. Before you fix something, you write a failing test first.

6. Now write a more complex test case. Set up the shopping cart to contain two books, call the `totalAmount()` function,
   and then check the calculated value.

7. In your test case, did you have to define all properties (name, author, etc) for each book, because otherwise
   TypeScript would not compile your code? A
   [type assertion](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#type-assertions)
   can help you get rid of all those unnecessary properties. Make your test more readable using a type assertion, and
   only specify the prices of the book in your test.

[Next](2.testbed-and-http.md)
