[Go to table of contents](index.md)

# Scenario

Services implement the core logic of your application. They implement backend calls, operations on your data, error
handling, and lots of other functionality that is crucial for your application to work. Evidently, properly testing all
your services is essential.

In the previous assignment, you wrote a number of unit tests for a ShoppingCartService. Your code only tested plain
TypeScript code, and did not interact with Angular in any way. In this assignment you will learn how to test a service
within an Angular context.

In our book shop, a copy of your shopping cart is saved on the server. If you refresh the application, the list of items
is retrieved from the server and shown again. To retrieve the items, Angular's HttpClient is used. In this assignment,
you'll inject an HttpClient in your test and mock its behaviour.

## Techniques

* [TestBed](https://angular.io/guide/testing-services#angular-testbed)
* [Mocking http calls](https://angular.io/guide/http#testing-http-requests)

#### TestBed

In the previous assignment, you created an instance of the ShoppingCartService yourself and assigned it to a constant.
In this assignment, you will test the interaction of the ShoppingCartService with the HttpClient. Since HttpClient is an
Angular service, you will now let Angular instantiate the HttpClient and the ShoppingCartService.

1. Open src/app/shopping-cart/shopping-cart.service.spec.ts.

2. Create a TestBed containing your ShoppingCartService. Put the following code right below the line containing the
   `describe` command.

   ```
   beforeEach(() => {
     TestBed.configureTestingModule({
       providers: [
         ShoppingCartService
       ]
     });
   });
   ```

   > With Jest's `beforeEach`, you can specify a set up function that is automatically called before each test is
   > run. In Java and JUnit, this is equivalent to annotating a function with @Before.
   >
   > TestBed is an Angular testing utility, that creates a testing module. A testing module is an NgModule, but one that
   > specifically contains the services and components that are needed for your test. In the above case, we have a
   > testing module with only an instance of the ShoppingCartService.

3. Since we want to use the ShoppingCartService within an Angular context, we will let Angular create an instance of the
   ShoppingCartService, and obtain the instance from the TestBed. Right before the `beforeEach`, declare a variable
   `service` of type ShoppingCartService, but do not assign any value to it (this variable replaces the constant you
   defined in step 3 of the previous assignment). Within `beforeEach()`, right after you configured the testing module,
   get the service from the TestBed and assign it to the variable.

   ```
   service = TestBed.inject(ShoppingCartService)
   ```

   > Use `TestBed.inject()` to obtain provided services from the TestBed.

4. Check the test output. Why did the test fail? Add the following line to your testing module and check your test
   results again:

   ```
    imports: [
        HttpClientTestingModule
     ]
   ```

   > HttpClientTestingModule is defined in `@angular/common/http/testing` and defines utility classes for testing with
   > `@angular/common/http`. One of the things it provides is an instance of the HttpClient that mocks the actual http
   > calls. Other testing modules are `@angular/core/testing` and `@angular/router/testing`.

#### Writing the test

1. Add a test `it('should get the shopping cart items from the backend when getShoppingCart is called', () => {})`.

2. Within the test, create a constant `expectedResult` with the test data: an array with three books.

3. Then, call `getShoppingCart()`. `getShoppingCart()` returns an Observable. Subscribe to the Observable in order to
   save the value returned from the http call in a local variable, so we can inspect its value later.

   ```
   let observedResult = [];
   service.getShoppingCart().subscribe(returnValue => observedResult = returnValue);
   ```

4. Using Jest matchers, check that the length of `observedResult` is 3.

5. Check the test output in your browser window. Why did the test fail?

#### Mocking http calls

Unit tests should be able to run isolated. They should not depend on http servers being available or http servers
returning specific results. The `@angular/common/http/testing` module assures that calls to the HttpClient are mocked.
In the next steps, you will use the `HttpTestingController` from the testing module to explicitly set the test data that
is returned by the HttpClient.

1. Within the test, obtain an instance of the HttpTestingController using `TestBed.inject()` and assign it to a
   variable `httpMock`.

2. Use the following code to set an expectation. This code will check immediately if an http call to the specified
   address was already done. First, put this code BEFORE your call to `getShoppingCart()` and check the test output.
   Then move the code to AFTER your call to `getShoppingCart()` and see the difference. Can you explain what happens?

   ```
   const req = httpMock.expectOne('/shopping-cart');
   ```

   > The code above checks that the URL that was called matches `/shopping-cart`. You can also check other things like
   > what http method was used or what headers were put on the request, using
   > [custom-request-expectations](https://angular.io/guide/http#custom-request-expectations).

3. Right now, the http call made in `getShoppingCart()` is still waiting for its reply, and the Observable is not
   resolved yet. Mock the http server's reply, using the following code. Do you understand what happens?

   ```
   req.flush(expectedResult);
   ```

## Using done () => {} in a test

1. Within the subscribe of service.getShoppingCart(), we assign the returnValue to a variable, that is later checked
   outside the subscribe statement. Why don't we put the expect-statement right within the subscribe-statement?

2. You can explicitly tell a unit test when it is done. Pass a `done` variable into the it:

   ```
   it('should ...', done => {
   ```

   Run the test. Do you understand why it fails?

3. Now move the expect-statement into the subscribe callback, and - also within the subscribe callback - call done().
   You can now remove the declaration of the `observedResult` variable. What happens if you run the test?

4. Remove the flush() statement, and check that the test fails, even if the expect()-statement within the subscribe was
   not even called. Which way of writing down the test (observedValue or done?) do you prefer?

## Optional

1. Verify in your test that the http request in getShoppingCart() is actually a GET request.

2. Add an expectation that a certain header is added to the http request. See the test fail, and make it pass.

3. In the Angular documentation, find out what httpMock.verify() does. Add it to your test, and try to fail it.

4. With `req.error(statusCode)` you can simulate an http error
   ([more information](https://angular.io/api/common/http/testing/TestRequest)). Add a test that checks the correct
   handling of an http error. See that it fails, and fix it.

[Next](3.testing-smart-components.md)
