[Go to table of contents](index.md)

# Scenario

The shopping cart is shown on the screen using a number of components. A container component (or smart component) is
responsible for fetching the data, distributing the data over its child components and performing logic on certain
events. Its child components are pure presentation components, showing the data on the screen, and sending back user
events (like clicks and form submits).

Container components and presentation components have different responsibilities, and can be tested in different ways.
Splitting your code into container components and presentation components significantly simplifies your unit testing,
since you only have to care about one thing at a time. When testing container components, you do not have to worry about
presentation. When testing presentation components, you only have to worry about presentation and nothing else.

In this assignment you will write typical test cases for a container component. You will use the techniques learned in
the previous two assignments, and you will learn new techniques like Jest mock functions.

Testing presentation components will be handled in the next assignment.

## Techniques

* [Component fixtures](https://angular.io/guide/testing#createcomponent)
* [Jest mock functions](https://jestjs.io/docs/mock-function-api)

#### Setting up a component fixture

1. Open the test specification for the ShoppingCartContainerComponent. For your convenience, the basic test setup is
   already provided. If you use the Angular CLI to generate your components, similar code will be provided by the
   Angular CLI. Do you understand what happens in the provided code?

   > If you want to use a component from the TestBed in your test, you have to call `createComponent()` on the TestBed.
   > `createComponent()` returns a *test fixture*. A test fixture is a handy object that let's you inspect how Angular
   > rendered the component. `fixture.componentInstance` gives you access to the underlying TypeScript object.

2. Add a testcase `it('should call the ShoppingCartService on init', () => {})`.

3. Check the test output. Do you understand the error? The component cannot be created, since the child components used
   in the component's template are not defined in the TestBed.

4. Try to fix this by adding the ShoppingCartPresentationComponent to the TestBed. Have another look at the test output.
   What do you see now?

   > Angular tries to render the complete component tree under the tested component. You could add all those children and grandchildren
   > to the TestBed, but it will grow your TestBed very large and most important: your unit test won't be a real
   > isolated unit test anymore. A quick way to fix this is by using the NO_ERRORS_SCHEMA.

5. Add the following line to your TestBed:

   ```
   schemas: [NO_ERRORS_SCHEMA]
   ```   

   > The NO_ERRORS_SCHEMA causes the TestBed to ignore compilation failures of your html templates. This is a quick way
   > to fix the above problem. A disadvantage of using this schema, is that your tests will not detect errors like typos
   > in your html templates.

#### Using Jest mock functions

The test is still not running. An instance of the ShoppingCartService was not provided in the TestBed. We could add it,
but then our unit test will not be isolated anymore. Instead, we will use an object with Jest mock functions, mocking
the actual shopping cart service.

1. Define a spy object for the ShoppingCartService:

   ```
   const shoppingCartServiceStub = {
     getShoppingCart: jest.fn()
   }
   ```

   > We are creating a test stub for the shopping cart service, that can be used instead of a real shopping cart service.
   > We provide a Jest mock function (jest.fn()) for getShoppingCart. This will allow us to mock return values for that
   > function for each test separately.

2. Provide the ShoppingCartService in the TestBed, using the following special syntax:

   ```
   providers: [{provide: ShoppingCartService, useValue: shoppingCartServiceStub}]
   ```

   > By using `{provide: , useValue: }`, you provide an instance of the ShoppingCartService. But with useValue, you
   > explicitly tell Angular what object it should use as the ShoppingCartService. This way, you can replace the real
   > ShoppingCartService with a test double.


3. Start writing your test. First provide test data:

   ```
   const testData = of([{title: 'selected book'}] as Book[]);
   ```

   > The ShoppingCartService returns an Observable of books that are in your shopping cart. Therefore, the test data we
   > will return in the test must also be of type Observable. The of operator (imported from 'rxjs') takes
   > a simple value and turns it into an Observable. We added the `as Book[]` type assertion so the compiler will not
   > complain we did not add all required properties of Book.

4. Now make the ShoppingCartService return your test data as soon as getShoppingCart is called. Use the following
   syntax:

   ```
   shoppingCartServiceStub.getShoppingCart.mockReturnValue(someValue);
   ```

   > You an easily set up mock behaviour for a mock function, by calling `.mockReturnValue(value)` on it.
   > As soon as the method is called, the provided value will be returned by the mock function.
   > Other things like, throwing errors or mocking a return value once are
   > [also possible](https://jestjs.io/docs/mock-function-api)

5. Test that the books property of the ShoppingCartContainerComponent indeed has the value that was provided by the spy
   object. Use a jasmine matcher `expect(observedValue).toEqual(expectedValue)`. Does the test succeed? Why (not)?

   > One of the key features of Angular is that it detects changes. Because of this, changes to properties on your
   > component are reflected in your rendered component template. In a running Angular application, this change
   > detection happens automatically. In a test fixture, you control this change detection yourself by calling
   > fixture.detectChanges().
   >
   > The books property of the ShoppingCartContainerComponent is initialised in its ngOnInit() method. ngOnInit is a
   > lifecycle method that is automatically called by Angular when the very first change detection is run on the
   > component. Within a unit test, we have to trigger this change detection manually.

6. Call fixture.detectChanges() before you check the value of the books property and see if the test succeeds now.

## Optional

1. Jest mock functions track and remember all calls that were made to them. Check the
   [documentation of Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/mock-function-api#mockfnmockcalls) and see what features Jest has
   available to inspect those calls and their arguments. Extend your test and explicitly test that only one call to
   getShoppingCart was made with no arguments.

2. In our test we are manually triggering the change detection process by calling fixture.detectChanges(). Go to the
   Angular documentation and read how you can use
   [automatic change detection](https://angular.io/guide/testing-components-scenarios#automatic-change-detection) in
   your tests and try to implement it.

3. Add a test case in which the spy object throws an error. In your test, set an expectation what should happen. Run
   your test and see it fail. Then pass your test by implementing the expected behaviour.

[Next](4.testing-dumb-components.md)
