[Go to table of contents](index.md)

# Scenario

In this final assignment we you will test what is going on in the html. When setting an array of books on the
presentation component, you will test that the correct number of books is shown in the html. And you will learn how to
emulate user events in your tests, so you can test if clicking elements in the html triggers the desired behaviour.

## Techniques

* [Quering html elements](https://angular.io/guide/testing-components-scenarios#query-for-the-h1)
* [Triggering event handlers](https://angular.io/guide/testing-components-scenarios#clicking)

#### Testing what is rendered

The presentation component renders an array of books. In this assignment, you will test that the array of books is
rendered correctly.

1. Open the test specification for the ShoppingCartPresentationComponent. A basic test set up is already provided. Add a
   test case `it('should display the books in the template', () => {})`.

2. When running the app in a production environment, Angular's change detection process will set the value of the
   @Input() property `books`. In the test, we can control the value of the property ourselves and set a value manually.
   Set the value of the books property and provide a list of books. The books property is of type Observable. Use
   Observable.of() to transform a book array into an Observable.

   ```
   component.books = of(...);
   ```

   Use type assertion if TypeScript complains that your test data is not of type Book[].

3. Call `fixture.detectChanges()` to make sure that the changes in the @Input() variables are reflected in the rendered
   html.

4. Each book in the array is rendered as an h2 element. Use the code below to query all h2 elements in the rendered html
   and assign the result to a constant. Do you understand how the code works?

   ```
   const nodes = fixture.nativeElement.querySelectorAll('h2');
   ```

   > You can use the TestBed to inspect the html that was rendered by Angular. The test fixture has a native html element.
   > You can use the standard querySelector and querySelectorAll for querying elements that satisfy certain conditions.
   > 'h2' is a css selector. All elements that have a css selector of 'h2' will be returned.
   >
   > querySelectorAll() finds all elements that match the criteria. querySelector() is for finding a single element.

5. Use Jest matchers to check that the length of the nodes array equals the number of books provided in step 2.

#### Testing mouse clicks

The ShoppingCartPresentationComponent has a link that can be clicked for emptying the cart. When the link is clicked, an
event is sent to the parent component that implements the logic for handling the click.

1. Add a new test case to the specification. It will check that an event was emitted when the empty cart link was
   clicked.

2. Initially, the link has not been clicked yet. Introduce a variable `clicked` that is initialised to false to reflect
   this.

3. The ShoppingCartPresentationComponent has an @Output() variable clearShoppingCart that emits events. Subscribe to it
   and set `clicked` to true as soon as the link is clicked.

4. Use fixture.nativeElement.querySelector() to find the link for clearing the shopping cart. The link has
   id `clearShoppingCart`. Assign the element to a variable clearShoppingCartLink, so you can use it later in the test.

   > The css selector for an element with a specific id is `#specificId`. For testing purposes, setting ids on html
   > elements is a good practice.

5. Emulate a click on the link:

   ```
   clearShoppingCartLink.click(); 
   ```

6. Using Jest matchers, check the `clicked` variable to see that the clearShoppingCart event was indeed triggered.

## Optional

1. In the first part of the assignment, you checked that the number of books rendered is correct, but you did not yet
   check if the titles were rendered correctly. Use `htmlElement.textContent` to get the text content of the rendered
   nodes. Check that they contain the actual titles of the books.

2. Until now, you tested the presentation component in total isolation. If you remove the @Input() and @Output()
   decorators from the ShoppingCartPresentationComponent, your application will break, but your tests will still pass
   (try it!). Test your ShoppingCartPresentationComponent within a
   [test host component](https://angular.io/guide/testing-components-scenarios#component-inside-a-test-host) to verify
   that the @Input() and @Output() variables work correctly.
